Pectra on Isthmus FMA (#201)
ethereum-optimism/design-docs: governance/fma-isthmus-l2-pectra.md

  - [FM5: BLS Precompiles could fail to execute in the FP program](#fm5-bls-precompiles-could-fail-to-execute-in-the-fp-program)
  - [FM6: Increased call data cost affects network upgrade transactions](#fm6-increased-call-data-cost-affects-network-upgrade-transactions)
  - [FM7: Early fork if batches containing EIP-7702 transactions could be posted before Pectra](#fm7-early-fork-if-batches-containing-eip-7702-transactions-could-be-posted-before-pectra)
  - [Generic items we need to take into account:](#generic-items-we-need-to-take-into-account)
- [Action Items](#action-items)
- [Audit Requirements](#audit-requirements)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

_Italics are used to indicate things that need to be replaced._

|                    |                                                    |
| ------------------ | -------------------------------------------------- |
| Author             | Julian Meyer                                       |
| Created at         | 2025-02-10                                         |

> | Initial Reviewers  |                  |

Reviewer: I see @refcell left some comments, any other non-security people that should review this? 
```suggestion
| Initial Reviewers  |  refcell                |
```

Author: added refcell! Not sure about other non-security people, but I'll post in the upgrade channel now that it's ready for review

| Need Approval From |                            |

> | Status             | Draft |

Reviewer: When do you expect this to be out of draft and ready for review?

Author: Should be sometime today, hopefully in a few hours - planning to go through all the comments and address.

>
> - Show your work: Include steps and tools for each conclusion.
> - Completeness of risks considered.
> - Include both implementation and operational failure modes
> - Provide references to support the reviewer.
> - The size of the document will likely be proportional to the project's complexity.
> - The ultimate goal of this document is to identify action items to improve the security of the project. The FMA review process can be accelerated by proactively identifying action items during the writing process.

## Introduction

This document covers implementation of Pectra features in the OP stack. This requires a hard fork due to new transaction types like EIP-7702 transactions. This does not cover generic hardfork related security concerns, which will be addressed in a separate document.

Included EIPs:

-   EIP-7702: Set code transaction
-   EIP-2537: BLS12-381 precompiles
-   EIP-2935: Block hashes contract predeploy
-   EIP-7251: Increase the MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALANCE
-   EIP-7623: Increase calldata cost
-   EIP-7002: Execution layer triggerable withdrawals
-   EIP-6110: Supply validator deposits on chain

> -   EIP-7685: General purpose execution layer requests

Reviewer: Are there OP Stack-specific considerations, design docs, specs, etc we can link to? This makes it seem like we are not doing any bespoke work and are just incorporating what e.g. upstream geth implements, and I am unsure if that is the case

Author: I added an explanation for each. There's no central source listing each change currently. We were going a lot off of this document: https://gist.github.com/protolambda/59b534d804c23dc7b3592ad1c38048d4

I can add this doc somewhere, but I think the updated explanations in this doc should give a good overview.

## Failure Modes and Recovery Paths

### FM1: Chain halt due to upgrade transaction failing

- **Description:** The chain could halt if a network upgrade transaction can't be included in the upgrade block.
- **Risk Assessment:** High severity, low likelihood
- **Mitigations:**
  1. end-to-end tests created for network upgrade transactions

>   2. same upgrade path as previous predeploys

Reviewer 2: If possible, can we link to other predeploys here so we can be specific in what we're referring to?

Author: added links!

- **Detection:** Monitors should trigger an alert immediately

> - **Recovery Path(s)**: This would require an emergency update if it occurred fixing the network upgrade transaction and updates to `op-node`.

Reviewer: For each failure mode, let be as specific as possible. Some examples based on the text in failure mode:
- When tests are a mitigation, let's link to those tests as evidence they exist, or create an action item to track writing those tests
- Like @refcell said, let's be explicit about what "same upgrade path" means
- When detection requires monitoring, what exactly are we monitoring? If that monitoring already exists we can link to it, if not there should be an action item to track that
- Does an emergency update mean an emergency hard fork, or just an update of node software with no hard fork needed?

Author: Clarified all of these items.

About monitoring, what would a good link be? Most of these are consensus bugs that will cause a chain halt (guessing there's a monitor for unsafe L2 liveness) or a fork (would trigger the same alert for a different client like `op-reth`). Or are there specific monitoring tasks we need to do before this is approved - like an open source repo for adding hard fork checks?

### FM2: Chain halt due to request hash mismatch

> - **Description:** Requests hash was added to the block header. If it mismatches between geth and op-node, the chain could halt

Author: updated wording here

- **Risk Assessment:** High severity, low likelihood
- **Mitigations:**
  1. End-to-end tests
  2. Simple validation rules - always must be an empty hash
- **Detection:** Monitors should trigger an alert immediately.

> - **Recovery Path(s)**: This would require an emergency update if it occurred fixing the network upgrade transaction and updates to `op-node`.

Reviewer 2: This wasn't updated from prior FM

```suggestion
- **Recovery Path(s)**: This would require an emergency update if it occurred fixing requests hash logic in respective clients (e.g. `op-node`, `op-geth`, `op-reth`, ...)
```

Author: fixed!

### FM3: EIP-7702 transactions cannot be included on the chain

- **Description:** SetCode (EIP-7702) transactions can't be included on chain.
- **Risk Assessment:** Low impact, low likelihood
- **Mitigations:** 
	1. End-to-end tests of set code transactions before and after the fork
- **Detection:** Sending set code transactions would fail; probably manual detection is most likely.

> - **Recovery Path(s)**: This would require another update and fork.

Reviewer 2: Is this detailing a bug where the specification logic isn't sufficient for EIP-7702 txs to land on chain?

I could also see a small RPC bug or something non-logic related to cause an EIP-7702 tx issue that wouldn't necessarily require a hardfork.

Author: Updated this FMA with an explanation of what might happen. This would be a fork caused by a consensus bug in a client not allowing EIP-7702 txs after Isthmus is active.

- **Description:** If implemented in the FP program, BLS precompiles could greatly increase computation time.
- **Risk Assessment:** High impact, low likelihood
- **Mitigations:**
	1. Fully mitigated by using an accelerated precompile that calls out to L1 instead of calculating inside the program.
- **Detection:** op-program trace runner computation time will increase (possibly triggering an alert)
- **Recovery Path(s)**: If this occurred, which it can't with the mitigations, we'd have to make op-program efficient enough to execute
BLS precompiles in sufficient time.

### FM5: BLS Precompiles could fail to execute in the FP program

- **Description:** If implemented in the FP program, BLS precompiles could fail to execute. This could cause certain blocks to be unprovable.
- **Risk Assessment:** High impact, low likelihood
- **Mitigations:**
	1. Fully mitigated by using an accelerated precompile that calls out to L1 instead of calculating inside the program. This means it should 
  have the same performance characteristics as existing crypto precompiles like `ecrecover`.
- **Detection:** op-program trace runner failure (possibly triggering an alert)

> - **Recovery Path(s)**: If this occurred, which it can't with the mitigations, we'd have to make op-program efficient enough to execute BLSprecompiles in sufficient time.

Reviewer 2: nit
```suggestion
- **Recovery Path(s)**: If this occurred, which it can't with the mitigations, we'd have to make op-program efficient enough to execute BLS precompiles in sufficient time.
```

Author: fixed

### FM6: Increased call data cost affects network upgrade transactions

- **Description:** Increased calldata cost could mean that network upgrade transactions fail.
- **Risk Assessment:** High impact, low likelihood
- **Mitigations:**
	1. Tested that network upgrade transactions don't fail.
- **Detection:** op-program trace runner failure (possibly triggering an alert)

> - **Recovery Path(s)**: If this occurred, which it can't with the mitigations, we'd have to make op-program efficient enough to execute BLSprecompiles in sufficient time.

Reviewer 2: This needs to be updated for this FM

Author: fixed

> ### FM7: Early fork if batches containing EIP-7702 transactions could be posted before Pectra

Author: A malicious batcher could cause this to happen if we don't have a check to ensure type 4 (SetCode) txs can only appear in a batch after Isthmus is active. The specs do cover this, so this would only be caused by a batcher implementation diverging from the spec.

> ### FM7: Early fork if batches containing EIP-7702 transactions could be posted before Pectra

Reviewer: @meyer9 General FMA comment since I'm not sure if this is documented anywhere—in general all github comments can be resolved once either: the FMA itself is updated with info from the comment thread (like clarifying this Failure Mode's description with this info), or a new action item to track whatever was in the comment. Therefore in this case we should implement the info from this comment thread directly into the FMA itself.

### Generic items we need to take into account:

<!-- See [generic hardfork failure modes](./fma-generic-hardfork.md) and [generic smart contract failure modes](./fma-generic-contracts.md).
Incorporate any applicable failure modes with FMA-specific mitigations and detections directly into this document. -->

- [x] Check this box to confirm that these items have been considered and updated if necessary.

## Action Items

Below is what needs to be done before launch to reduce the chances of the above failure modes occurring, and to ensure they can be detected and recovered from:

- [ ] Resolve all comments on this document and incorporate them into the document itself (Assignee: document author)
- [ ] FM6: double check that call data cost doesn't break upgrade transactions

## Audit Requirements

_Given the failure modes and action items, will this project require an audit? See [OP Labs Audit Framework: When to get external security review and how to prepare for it](https://gov.optimism.io/t/op-labs-audit-framework-when-to-get-external-security-review-and-how-to-prepare-for-it/6864) for a reference decision making framework. Please explain your reasoning._

> **No.** All of the code is well-tested and has very low likelihood for any failure modes with reasonably high impact.

Reviewer: We should explain the rationale in the context of the audit framework linked above

Author: Added to the end with an explanation on why we should rely on real-world testing rather than auditing.

# Pectra Features on Isthmus

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)

> - [Failure Modes and Recovery Paths](#failure-modes-and-recovery-paths)

Reviewer: One failure mode I don't see is that L1 Pectra means `msg.sender == tx.origin` checks no longer ensure the caller has no code. We have this check in the PreimageOracle, and we have `Address.isContract` checks in the ERC721Bridges and StandardBridges. The latter two are codesize based so I believe they should be unaffected. But we should have a failure mode for this, and explain why (hopefully) this change doesn't break anything

Reviewer: Asked in discord about this as well: https://discord.com/channels/1244729134312198194/1331301843829002313/1342155969400012860

Author: Good call out! Will add a section for that

Reviewer: Update on the plan for these checks is here: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/design-docs/pull/209
